=head1 NAME

rtpengine - NGCP proxy for RTP and other UDP based media traffic

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<rtpengine> B<--interface>=I<addr>... B<--listen-tcp>|B<--listen-udp>|B<--listen-ng>|B<--listen-tcp-ng>|B<--listen-http>|B<--listen-https>=I<addr>... [I<option>...]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The Sipwise NGCP rtpengine is a proxy for RTP traffic and other UDP based
media traffic.
It is meant to be used with the Kamailio SIP proxy and forms a drop-in
replacement for any of the other available RTP and media proxies.

=head1 OPTIONS

Most of these options are indeed optional, with two exceptions. It's
mandatory to specify at least one local IP address through B<--interface>,
and at least one of the B<--listen->I<...> options must be given.

All options can (and should) be provided in a config file instead of
at the command line. See the B<--config-file> option below for details.

=over 4

=item B<--help>

Print the usage information.

=item B<-v>, B<--version>

If called with this option, the B<rtpengine> daemon will simply print its
version number and exit.

=item B<--codecs>

Print a list of supported codecs and exit.

=item B<--config-file=>I<FILE>

Specifies the location of a config file to be used. The config file is an
I<.ini> style config file, with all command-line options listed here also
being valid options in the config file.
For all command-line options, the long name version instead of the
single-character version (e.g. B<table> instead of just B<t>) must be
used in the config file.
For boolean options that are either present or not (e.g. B<no-fallback>), a
boolean value (either B<true> or B<false>) must be used in the config file.
If an option is given in both the config file and at the command line,
the command-line value overrides the value from the config file.
Options that can be specified multiple times on the command line must be
given only once in the config file, with the multiple values separated by
semicolons (see section L<INTERFACES> below for an example).

As a special value, B<none> can be passed here to suppress loading of the
default config file.

=item B<--config-section=>I<STRING>

Specifies the I<.ini> style section to be used in the config file.
Multiple sections can be present in the config file, but only one can be
used at a time.
The default value is B<rtpengine>.
A config file section is started in the config file using square brackets
(e.g. B<[rtpengine]>).

=item B<-t>, B<--table=>I<INT>

Takes an integer argument and specifies which kernel table to use for
in-kernel packet forwarding.
See the section on in-kernel operation in the F<README.md> for more detail.
Optional and defaults to zero.
If in-kernel operation is not desired, a negative number can be specified.

=item B<-F>, B<--no-fallback>

Will prevent fallback to userspace-only operation if the kernel module is
unavailable.
In this case, startup of the daemon will fail with an error if this option
is given.

=item B<-S>, B<--save-interface-ports>

Will bind ports only on the first available local interface, of desired
family, of logical interface. If no ports available on any local interface
of desired family, give an error message.

In this case, ICE will be broken.

=item B<-i>, B<--interface=>[I<NAME>B</>]I<IP>[B<!>I<IP>]

Specifies a local network interface for RTP.
At least one must be given, but multiple can be specified.
See the section L<INTERFACES> just below for details.

=item B<-l>, B<--listen-tcp=>[I<IP>B<:>]I<PORT>

=item B<-u>, B<--listen-udp=>[I<IP46>B<:>]I<PORT>

=item B<-n>, B<--listen-ng=>[I<IP46>B<:>]I<PORT>

=item B<-n>, B<--listen-tcp-ng=>[I<IP46>B<:>]I<PORT>

These options each enable one of the 4 available control protocols if given
and each take either just a port number as argument, or an I<address:port>
pair, separated by colon.
At least one of these 3 options must be given.

The B<tcp> protocol is obsolete.
It was used by old versions of B<OpenSER> and its B<mediaproxy> module.
It is provided for backwards compatibility.

The B<udp> protocol is used by B<Kamailio>'s B<rtpproxy> module.
In this mode, B<rtpengine> can be used as a drop-in replacement for any
other compatible RTP proxy.

The B<ng> protocol is an advanced control protocol and can be used with
B<Kamailio>'s B<rtpengine> module.
With this protocol, the complete SDP body is passed to B<rtpengine>,
rewritten and passed back to B<Kamailio>.
Several additional features are available with this protocol, such as
ICE handling, SRTP bridging, etc.

The B<tcp-ng> protocol is in fact the B<ng> protocol but transported over TCP.

It is recommended to specify not only a local port number, but also
B<127.0.0.1> as interface to bind to.

=item B<-c>, B<--listen-cli=>[I<IP46>:]I<PORT>

TCP ip and port to listen for the CLI (command line interface).

=item B<-g>, B<--graphite=>I<IP46>:I<PORT>

Address of the graphite statistics server.

=item B<-w>, B<--graphite-interval=>I<INT>

Interval of the time when information is sent to the graphite server.

=item B<--graphite-prefix=>I<STRING>

Add a prefix for every graphite line.

=item B<-t>, B<--tos=>I<INT>

Takes an integer as argument and if given, specifies the TOS value that
should be set in outgoing packets.
The default is to leave the TOS field untouched.
A typical value is 184 (B<Expedited Forwarding>).

=item B<--control-tos=>I<INT>

Takes an integer as argument and if given, specifies the TOS value that
should be set in the control-ng interface packets.
The default is to leave the TOS field untouched.
This parameter can also be set or listed via B<rtpengine-ctl>.

=item B<-o>, B<--timeout=>I<SECS>

Takes the number of seconds as argument after which a media stream should
be considered dead if no media traffic has been received.
If all media streams belonging to a particular call go dead, then the call
is removed from B<rtpengine>'s internal state table.
Defaults to 60 seconds.

=item B<-s>, B<--silent-timeout=>I<SECS>

Ditto as the B<--timeout> option, but applies to muted or inactive media
streams.
Defaults to 3600 (one hour).

=item B<-a>, B<--final-timeout=>I<SECS>

The number of seconds since call creation, after call is deleted.
Useful for limiting the lifetime of a call.
This feature can be disabled by setting the parameter to 0.
By default this timeout is disabled.

=item B<--offer-timeout=>I<SECS>

This timeout (in seconds) is applied to calls which only had an B<offer>
but no B<answer>.
Defaults to 3600 (one hour).

=item B<-p>, B<--pidfile=>I<FILE>

Specifies a path and file name to write the daemon's PID number to.

=item B<-f>, B<--foreground>

If given, prevents the daemon from daemonizing, meaning it will stay in
the foreground.
Useful for debugging.

=item B<-m>, B<--port-min=>I<INT>

=item B<-M>, B<--port-max=>I<INT>

Both take an integer as argument and together define the local port range
from which B<rtpengine> will allocate UDP ports for media traffic relay.
Default to 30000 and 40000 respectively.

=item B<-L>, B<--log-level=>I<INT>

Takes an integer as argument and controls the highest log level which will be
sent to syslog. This is merely the default log level used for logging
subsystems (see below) that don't explicitly have a separate log level
configured.

The log levels correspond to the ones found in the L<syslog(3)> man page.
The default value is B<6>, equivalent to LOG_INFO.
The highest possible value is B<7> (LOG_DEBUG) which will log everything.

During runtime, the log level can be decreased by sending the signal
SIGURS1 to the daemon and can be increased with the signal SIGUSR2.

=item B<--log-level->I<subsystem>B<=>I<INT>

Configures a log level for one of the logging subsystems. A logging subsystem
which doesn't have a log level configured explicitly takes its default value
from the B<log-level> setting described above, with the exceptino of the
B<internals> subsystem which by default has all logging disabled.

The full list of logging subsystems can be viewed by pulling up the B<--help>
online help. Some (if not all) subsystems are: B<core>, B<spandsp> (messages
generated by SpanDSP itself), B<ffmpeg> (messages generated by ffmpeg libraries
themselves), B<transcoding> (messages related to RTP/media transcoding),
B<codec> (messages related to codec negotiation), B<rtcp>, B<ice>, B<crypto>
(messages related to crypto/SRTP/SDES/DTLS negotiation), B<srtp> (messages
related to RTP/SRTP en/decryption), B<internals> (disabled by default), B<http>
(includes WebSocket), B<control> (messages related to control protocols,
including SDP exchanges).

=item B<--log-facilty=>B<daemon>|B<local0>|...|B<local7>|...

The syslog facilty to use when sending log messages to the syslog daemon.
Defaults to B<daemon>.

=item B<--log-facilty-cdr=>B<daemon>|B<local0>|...|B<local7>|...

Same as B<--log-facility> with the difference that only CDRs are written
to this log facility.

=item B<--log-facilty-rtcp=>B<daemon>|B<local0>|...|B<local7>|...

Same as B<--log-facility> with the difference that only RTCP data is
written to this log facility.
Be careful with this parameter since there may be a lot of information
written to it.

=item B<--log-facilty-dtmf=>B<daemon>|B<local0>|...|B<local7>|...

Same as B<--log-facility> with the difference that only DTMF events are
written to this log facility.
DTMF events are extracted from RTP packets conforming to RFC 4733, are
encoded in JSON format, and written as soon as the end of an event is
detected.

=item B<--log-format=>B<default>|B<parsable>

Selects between multiple log output styles.
The default is to prefix log lines with a description of the relevant
entity, such as B<[CALLID]> or B<[CALLID port 12345]>.
The B<parsable> output style is similar, but makes the ID easier to
parse by enclosing it in quotes, such as B<[ID="CALLID"]>
or B<[ID="CALLID" port="12345"]>.

=item B<--dtmf-log-dest=>I<IP46>:I<PORT>

Configures a target address for logging detected DTMF event. Similar
to the feature enabled by B<--log-facilty-dtmf>, but instead of writing
detected DTMF events to syslog, this sends the JSON payload to the
given address as UDP packets.

=item B<--dtmf-log-ng-tcp>

If B<--listen-tcp-ng> is enabled, this will send DTMF events to all
connected cliens encoded in bencode format.

=item B<--dtmf-no-suppress>

Some RTP clients continue to send audio RTP packets during a DTMF event,
resulting in both audio packets and DTMF packets appearing simultaneously. By
default, when transcoding, B<rtpengine> suppresses audio packets during a DTMF
event and will only send DTMF packets until the DTMF event is over. Setting
this option disables this feature.

=item B<--log-srtp-keys>

Write SRTP keys to error log instead of debug log.

=item B<-E>, B<--log-stderr>

Log to stderr instead of syslog.
Only useful in combination with B<--foreground>.

=item B<--split-logs>

Split multi-line log messages into individual log messages so that each
line receives its own log line prefix.

=item B<--no-log-timestamps>

Don't add timestamps to log lines written to stderr.
Only useful in combination with B<--log-stderr>.

=item B<--log-mark-prefix=>I<STRING>

Prefix to be added to particular data fields in log files that are deemed
sensitive and/or private information. Defaults to an empty string.

=item B<--log-mark-suffix=>I<STRING>

Suffix to be added to particular data fields in log files that are deemed
sensitive and/or private information. Defaults to an empty string.

=item B<--num-threads=>I<INT>

How many worker threads to create, must be at least one.
The default is to create as many threads as there are CPU cores available.
If the number of CPU cores cannot be determined or if it is less than four,
then the default is four.

=item B<--media-num-threads=>I<INT>

Number of threads to launch for media playback. Defaults to the same
number as B<num-threads>. This can be set to zero if no media playback
functionality is desired.

Media playback is actually handled by two threads: One for reading and
decoding the media file, and another to schedule and send out RTP packets.
So for example, if this option is set to 4, in total 8 threads will be
launched.

=item B<--thread-stack=>I<INT>

Set the stack size of each thread to the value given in kB. Defaults to 2048
kB. Can be set to -1 to leave the default provided by the OS unchanged.

=item B<--sip-source>

The original B<rtpproxy> as well as older version of B<rtpengine> by default
did not honour IP addresses given in the SDP body, and instead used the
source address of the received SIP message as default endpoint address.
Newer versions of B<rtpengine> reverse this behaviour and honour the
addresses given in the SDP body by default. This option restores the
old behaviour.

=item B<--dtls-passive>

Enables the B<DTLS=passive> flag for all calls unconditionally.

=item B<-d>, B<--delete-delay=>I<INT>

Delete the call from memory after the specified delay from memory.
Can be set to zero for immediate call deletion.

=item B<-r>, B<--redis=>[I<PW>B<@>]I<IP>B<:>I<PORT>B</>I<INT>

Connect to specified Redis database (with the given database number) and
use it for persistence storage.
The format of this option is I<ADDRESS>:I<PORT>/I<DBNUM>, for example
I<127.0.0.1:6379/12> to connect to the Redis DB number 12 running on
localhost on the default Redis port.

If the Redis database is protected with an authentication password, the
password can be supplied by prefixing the argument value with the password,
separated by an B<@> symbol, for example I<foobar@127.0.0.1:6379/12>.
Note that this leaves the password visible in the process list, posing a
security risk if untrusted users access the same system.
As an alternative, the password can also be supplied in the shell
environment through the environment variable B<RTPENGINE_REDIS_AUTH_PW>.

On startup, B<rtpengine> will read the contents of this database and
restore all calls stored therein.
During runtime operation, B<rtpengine> will continually update the
database's contents to keep it current, so that in case of a service
disruption, the last state can be restored upon a restart.

When this option is given, B<rtpengine> will delay startup until the
Redis database adopts the master role (but see below).

=item B<-w>, B<--redis-write=>[I<PW>B<@>]I<IP>B<:>I<PORT>B</>I<INT>

Configures a second Redis database for write operations.
If this option is given in addition to the first one, then the first
database will be used for read operations (i.e. to restore calls from)
while the second one will be used for write operations (to update states
in the database).

For password protected Redis servers, the environment variable for the
password is B<RTPENGINE_REDIS_WRITE_AUTH_PW>.

When both options are given, B<rtpengine> will start and use the Redis
database regardless of the database's role (master or slave).

=item B<-k>, B<--subscribe-keyspace=>I<INT>

List of redis keyspaces to subscribe.
If this is not present, no keyspaces are subscribed (default behaviour).
Further subscriptions could be added/removed via B<rtpengine-ctl ksadd/ksrm>.
This may lead to enabling/disabling of the redis keyspace notification feature.

=item B<--redis-num-threads=>I<INT>

How many redis restore threads to create.
The default is 4.

=item B<--redis-expires=>I<INT>

Expire time in seconds for redis keys.
Default is 86400.

=item B<active-switchover>

With this option enabled, any activity (such as signalling or media) on a call
that was created through a Redis keyspace notification will make B<rtpengine>
take control of that call. Without this option, an explicit command is required
for B<rtpengine> to take (or relinquish) control of a call.

=item B<-q>, B<--no-redis-required>

When this parameter is present or B<NO_REDIS_REQUIRED='yes'> or B<'1'> in
the config file, B<rtpengine> starts even if there is no initial connection
to redis databases (either to B<-r> or to B<-w> or to both redis).

Be aware that if the B<-r> redis cannot be initially connected, sessions
are not reloaded upon rtpengine startup, even though rtpengine still starts.

=item B<--redis-allowed-errors>

If this parameter is present and has a value >= 0, it will configure how
many consecutive errors are allowed when communicating with a redis server
before the redis communication will be temporarily disabled for that server.
While the communication is disabled there will be no attempts to reconnect
to redis or send commands to that server.
Default value is -1, meaning that this feature is disabled.
This parameter can also be set or listed via B<rtpengine-ctl>.

=item B<--redis-disable-time>

This parameter configures the number of seconds redis communication is
disabled because of errors.
This works together with redis-allowed-errors parameter.
The default value is 10.
This parameter can also be set or listed via B<rtpengine-ctl>.

=item B<--redis-cmd-timeout=>I<INT>

If this parameter is set to a non-zero value it will set the timeout,
in milliseconds, for each command to the redis server.
If redis does not reply within the specified timeout the command will fail.
The default value is 0, meaning that the commands will be blocking without
timeout.
This parameter can also be set or listed via B<rtpengine-ctl>; note that
setting the parameter to 0 will require a reconnect on all configured
redis servers.

=item B<--redis-connect-timeout=>I<INT>

This parameter sets the timeout value, in milliseconds, when connecting
to a redis server.
If the connection cannot be made within the specified timeout the
connection will fail.
Note that in case of failure, when reconnecting to redis, a B<PING> command
is issued before attempting to connect so the B<--redis-cmd-timeout> value
will also be added to the total waiting time.
This is useful if using B<--redis-allowed-errors>, when attempting to
estimate the total lost time in case of redis failures.
The default value for the connection timeout is 1000ms.
This parameter can also be set or listed via B<rtpengine-ctl>.

=item B<-b>, B<--b2b-url=>I<STRING>

Enables and sets the URI for an XMLRPC callback to be made when a call is
torn down due to packet timeout.
The special code B<%%> can be used in place of an IP address, in which case
the source address of the originating request (or alternatively the address
specified using the B<xmlrpc-callback> B<ng> protocol option) will be used.

=item B<-x>, B<--xmlrpc-format=>I<INT>

Selects the internal format of the XMLRPC callback message for B2BUA call
teardown.
0 is for SEMS,
1 is for a generic format containing the call-ID only,
2 is for Kamailio.

=item B<--max-sessions=>I<INT>

Limit the number of maximum concurrent sessions.
Set at startup via B<MAX_SESSIONS> in config file.
Set at runtime via B<rtpengine-ctl> util.
Setting the B<rtpengine-ctl set maxsessions 0> can be used in draining
rtpengine sessions.
Enable feature: B<MAX_SESSIONS=1000>
Enable feature: B<rtpengine-ctl set maxsessions> >= 0
Disable feature: B<rtpengine-ctl set maxsessions -1>
By default, the feature is disabled (i.e. maxsessions == -1).

=item B<--max-load=>I<FLOAT>

If the current 1-minute load average exceeds the value given here,
reject new sessions until the load average drops below the threshold.

=item B<--max-cpu=>I<FLOAT>

If the current CPU usage (in percent) exceeds the value given here,
reject new sessions until the CPU usage drops below the threshold.
CPU usage is sampled in 0.5-second intervals.
Only supported on systems providing a Linux-style F</proc/stat>.

=item B<--max-bandwidth=>I<INT>

If the current bandwidth usage (in bytes per second) exceeds the value
given here, reject new sessions until the bandwidth usage drops below
the threshold.
Bandwidth usage is sampled in 1-second intervals and is based on
received packets, not sent packets.

=item B<--homer=>I<IP46>B<:>I<PORT>

Enables sending the decoded contents of RTCP packets to a Homer SIP
capture server.
The transport is HEP version 3 and payload format is JSON.
This argument takes an IP address and a port number as value.

=item B<--homer-protocol=>B<udp>|B<tcp>

Can be either B<udp> or B<tcp> with B<udp> being the default.

=item B<--homer-id=>I<INT>

The HEP protocol used by Homer contains a "capture ID" used to distinguish
different sources of capture data.
This ID can be specified using this argument.

=item B<--recording-dir=>I<FILE>

An optional argument to specify a path to a directory where PCAP recording
files and recording metadata files should be stored. If not specified,
support for call recording will be disabled.

B<rtpengine> supports multiple mechanisms for recording calls.
See B<recording-method> below for a list.
The default recording method B<pcap> is described in this section.

PCAP files will be stored within a F<pcap> subdirectory and metadata
within a F<metadata> subdirectory.

The format for a metadata file is (with a trailing newline):

	/path/to/recording-pcap.pcap

	SDP mode: offer
	SDP before RTP packet: 1

	first SDP

	SDP mode: answer
	SDP before RTP packet: 1

	second SDP

	...

	SDP mode: answer
	SDP before RTP packet: 100

	n-th and final SDP


	start timestamp (YYYY-MM-DDThh:mm:ss)
	end timestamp   (YYYY-MM-DDThh:mm:ss)


	generic metadata

There are two empty lines between each logic block of metadata.
We write out all answer SDP, each separated from one another by one empty
line.
The generic metadata at the end can be any length with any number of
lines.
Metadata files will appear in the subdirectory when the call completes.
PCAP files will be written to the subdirectory as the call is being
recorded.

Since call recording via this method happens entirely in userspace,
in-kernel packet forwarding cannot be used for calls that are currently
being recorded and packet forwarding will thus be done in userspace only.

=item B<--recording-method=>B<pcap>|B<proc>

Multiple methods of call recording are supported and this option can be
used to select one.
Currently supported are the method B<pcap> and B<proc>.
The default method is B<pcap> and is the one described above.

The recording method B<proc> works by writing metadata files directly into
the B<recording-dir> (i.e. not into a subdirectory) and instead of recording
RTP packet data into pcap files, the packet data is exposed via a special
interface in the F</proc> filesystem.
Packets must then be retrieved from this interface by a dedicated userspace
component (usually a daemon such as recording-daemon included in this
repository).

Packet data is held in kernel memory until retrieved by the userspace
component, but only a limited number of packets (default 10) per media
stream.
If packets are not retrieved in time, they will be simply discarded.
This makes it possible to flag all calls to be recorded and then leave it
to the userspace component to decided whether to use the packet data for
any purpose or not.

In-kernel packet forwarding is fully supported with this recording method
even for calls being recorded.

=item B<--recording-format=>B<raw>|B<eth>

When recording to pcap file in B<raw> (default) format, there is no
ethernet header.
When set to B<eth>, a fake ethernet header is added, making each package
14 bytes larger.

=item B<--iptables-chain=>I<STRING>

This option enables explicit management of an iptables chain.
When enabled, B<rtpengine> takes control of the given iptables chain,
which must exist already prior to starting the daemon.
Upon startup, B<rtpengine> will flush the chain, and then add one B<ACCEPT>
rule for each media port (RTP/RTCP) opened.
Each rule will exactly match the individual port and destination IP address,
and will be created with the call ID as iptables comment.
The rule will be deleted when the port is closed.

This option allows creating a firewall with a default B<DROP> policy for
the entire port range used by B<rtpengine> and then referencing the given
iptables chain to only selectively allow the ports actually in use.

Note that this applies only to media ports, and does not apply to any other
ports (such as the control ports) used by B<rtpengine>.

Also note that the iptables API is not the most efficient one around and
does not lend itself to fast dynamic creation and deletion of rules.
If you have a high call volume, and especially many call attempts per
second, you might experience significant performance impact.
This is not a shortcoming of B<rtpengine> but rather of iptables and its
API implementation in the Linux kernel.
In such a case, it is recommended to add a static iptables rule for the
entire media port range instead, and not use this option.

=item B<--scheduling=>B<default>|...

=item B<--priority=>I<INT>

=item B<--idle-scheduling=>B<default>|...

=item B<--idle-priority=>I<INT>

These options control various thread scheduling parameters.
The B<scheduling> and B<priority> settings are applied to the main
worker threads, while the B<idle-> versions of these settings are
applied to various lower priority threads, such as timer runs.

The B<scheduling> settings take the name of one of the supported
scheduler policies.
Setting it to B<default> or B<none> is equivalent to not setting the
option at all and leaves the system default in place.
The strings B<fifo> and B<rr> refer to realtime scheduling policies.
B<other> is the Linux default scheduling policy.
B<batch> is similar to B<other> except for a small wake-up scheduling
penalty.
B<idle> is an extremely low priority scheduling policy.
The Linux-specific B<deadline> policy is not supported by B<rtpengine>.
Not all systems necessarily supports all scheduling policies; refer to
your system's sched(7) man page for details.

The B<priority> settings correspond to the scheduling priority for
realtime (B<fifo> or B<rr>) scheduling policies and must be in the range
of 1 (low) through 99 (high).
For all other scheduling policies (including no policy specified), the
B<priority> settings correspond to the B<nice> value and should be in
the range of -20 (high) through 19 (low).
Not all systems support thread-specific B<nice> values; on such a system,
using these settings might have unexpected results.
(Linux does support thread-specific B<nice> values.)
Refer to your system's sched(7) man page.

=item B<--mysql-host=>I<HOST>|I<IP>

=item B<--mysql-port=>I<INT>

=item B<--mysql-user=>I<USERNAME>

=item B<--mysql-pass=>I<PASSWORD>

Configuration for playing back media files that are stored in a
B<MySQL> (or B<MariaDB>) database. At least B<mysql-host> must be configured
for this to work. The others are optional and default to their respective
values from the B<MySQL>/B<MariaDB> client library.

=item B<--mysql-query=>I<STRING>

Query to be used for retrieving media files from the database. No default
exist, therefore this is a mandatory configuration for media playback from
database. The provided query string must contain the single format placeholder
B<%llu> and must not contain any other format placeholders. The ID value
passed to B<rtpengine> in the B<db-id> key of the B<play media> message will
be used in place of the placeholder when querying the database.

An example configuration might look like this:

  mysql-query = select data from voip.files where id = %llu

=item B<--endpoint-learning=>B<delayed>|B<immediate>|B<off>|B<heuristic>

Chooses one of the available algorithms to learn RTP endpoint addresses. The
legacy setting is B<delayed> which waits 3 seconds before committing to an
endpoint address, which is then learned from the first incoming RTP packet seen
after this delay. The setting B<immediate> learns the endpoint address from the
first incoming packet seen without the 3-second delay. Using B<off> disables
endpoint learning altogether, likely breaking clients behind NAT. The setting
B<heuristic> includes the 3-second delay, but source addresses seen from
incoming RTP packets are ranked according to preference: If a packet with a
source address and port matching the SDP address is seen, this address is used.
Otherwise, if a packet with a matching source address (but a different port) is
seen, that address is used. Otherwise, if a packet with a matching source port
(but different address) is seen, that address is used. Otherwise, the source
address of any incoming packet seen is used.

=item B<--jitter-buffer=>I<INT>

Size of (incoming) jitter buffer in packets. A value of zero (the default)
disables the jitter buffer. The jitter buffer is currently only implemented for
userspace operation.

=item B<--jb-clock-drift>

Enable clock drift compensation for the jitter buffer.

=item B<--debug-srtp>

Enable extra log messages to help debug SRTP issues. Per-packet details such as
sequence numbers, ROC, payloads (plain text and encrypted), authentication
tags, etc are recorded to the log. Every RTCP packet is logged in this way,
while every 512th RTP packet is logged. Only applies to packets
forwarded/processed in userspace.

=item B<--listen-http=>[I<IP>|I<HOSTNAME>B<:>]I<PORT>

=item B<--listen-https=>[I<IP>|I<HOSTNAME>B<:>]I<PORT>

Enable listening for HTTP or WebSocket connections, or their TLS-secured
counterparts HTTPS and WSS. If no interface is specified, then the listening
socket will be bound to all interfaces.

The HTTP listener supports both HTTP and WS, while the HTTPS listener supports
both HTTPS and WSS.

If HTTPS/WSS is enabled, a certificate must also be provided using the options
below.

=item B<--https-cert=>I<FILE>

=item B<--https-key=>I<FILE>

Provide a server certificate and corresponding private key for the HTTPS/WSS
listener, in PEM format.

=item B<--http-threads=>I<INT>

Number of worker threads for HTTP/HTTPS/WS/WSS. If not specified, then the same
number as given under B<num-threads> will be used. If no HTTP listeners are
enabled, then no threads are created.

=item B<--software-id=>I<STRING>

Sets a free-form string that is used to identify this software towards external
systems with, for example in outgoing ICE/STUN requests. Defaults to
B<rtpengine->I<VERSION>. The string is sanitised to replace all
non-alphanumeric characters with a dash to make it universally usable.

=item B<--dtx-delay=>I<INT>

Processing delay in milliseconds to handle discontinuous transmission (DTX) or
other transmission gaps. Defaults to zero (disabled) and is applicable to
transcoded audio streams only. When enabled, delays processing of received
packets for the specified time (much like a jitter buffer) in order to trigger
DTX handling when a transmission gap occurs. The decoder is then instructed to
fill in the missing time during a transmission gap, for example by generating
comfort noise. The delay should be configured to be higher than the expected
incoming jitter.

=item B<--max-dtx=>I<INT>

Maximum duration for DTX handling in seconds. If no further RTP media is
received within this time frame, then DTX processing will stop. Can be set to
zero or negative to disable and keep DTX processing on indefinitely. Defaults
to 30 seconds.

=item B<--dtx-buffer=>I<INT>

=item B<--dtx-lag=>I<INT>

These two options together control the maximum number of packets and amount of
audio that is allowed to be held in the DTX buffer. The B<dtx-buffer> option
limits the number of packets held in the DTX buffer, while the B<dtx-lag>
option limits the amount of audio (in milliseconds) to be held in the DTX
buffer. A DTX buffer overflow is declared when both limits are exceeded, in
which case DTX processing is sped up by B<dtx-shift> milliseconds.

The defauls are 10 packets and 100 milliseconds.

=item B<--dtx-shift=>I<INT>

Amount of time in milliseconds that DTX processing is shifted forward (sped up)
or backwards (delayed) in case of a DTX buffer overflow or underflow. An
underflow occurs when RTP packets are received slower than expected, while an
overflow occurs when packets are received faster than expected.

If this value is set to zero then no adjustments of the DTX timer will be made.
Instead, in order to keep up with the flow of received RTP packets, packets
will be dropped or additional DTX audio will be generated as needed.

=item B<--dtx-cn-params=>I<INT>

Specify one comfort noise parameter. This option follows the same format as
B<cn-payload> described below.

This option is applicable to audio generated to fill in transmission gaps
during a DTX event. The default setting is no value, which means silence will
be generated to fill in DTX gaps.

If any CN parameters are configured, the parameters will be passed to an RFC
3389 CN decoder, and the generated comfort noise will be used to fill in DTX
gaps.

=item B<--amr-dtx=>B<native>|B<CN>

Select the DTX behaviour for AMR codecs. The default is use the codec's
internal processing: during a DTX event, a "no data" frame is passed to the
decoder and the output is used as audio data.

If B<CN> is selected here, the same DTX mechanism as other codecs use is used
for AMR, which is to fill in DTX gaps with either silence or RFC 3389 comfort
noise (see B<dtx-cn-params>). This also affects processing of received SID
frames: SID frames would not be passed to the codec but instead be replaced by
generated silence or comfort noise.

=item B<--silence-detect=>I<FLOAT>

Enable silence detection and specify threshold in percent. This option is
applicable to transcoded stream only and defaults to zero (disabled).

When enabled, silence detection will be performed on all transcoded audio
streams. The threshold specified here is the sensitivity for detecting silence:
higher thresholds result in more audio to be detected as silence, while lower
thresholds result in less audio to be detected as silence. The threshold is
specified as percent between zero and 100. If set to 100, then all audio would
be detected as silence; if set to 50, then any audio that is quieter than 50%
of the maximum volume would be detected as silence; and so on. Setting it to
zero disables silence detection. To only detect silence that is very near or
equal to absolute silence, set this value to a low number such as 0.01. (For
certain codecs such as PCMA, a higher minimum threshold is required to detect
complete silence, as their compressed payloads don't decode to actual silence
but instead have a residual DC offset. For PCMA the minimum value is 0.013.)

Audio that is detected as silence will be replaced by comfort noise as
specified by the B<cn-payload> option (see below). Currently this is applicable
only to RTP peers that have advertised support for the B<CN> RTP payload type,
in which case the silence audio frames will be replaced by B<CN> RTP frames.

=item B<--cn-payload=>I<INT>

Specify one comfort noise parameter. This option can be given multiple times
and the format follows RFC 3389. When specified at the command line, list the
B<--cn-payload=> option multiple times, each one specifying a single CN
parameter. When used in the config file, list the option only a single time and
list multiple CN parameters separated by semicolons (e.g.
I<cn-payload = 20;40;60>).

The first CN payload value given is the noise level, specified as -dBov as per
RFC 3389. This means that a noise level of zero corresponds to maximum volume,
while higher numbers correspond to lower volumes. The highest allowable number
is 127, corresponding to -127 dBov, which is near silence.

Subsequent CN payload values carry spectral information (reflection
coefficients) as per RFC 3389. Allowable values for each coefficient are
between 0 and 254. Specifying spectral information is optional and the number
of coefficients listed (model order) is variable.

This option is applicable only to B<CN> packets generated from the silence
detection mechanism described above. The configured CN parameters are used
directly as payload of B<CN> packets sent by B<rtpengine>.

The default values are 32 (-32 dBov) for the noise level and no spectral
information.

=item B<--reorder-codecs>

Always sets the option B<reorder-codecs> in answer messages as described in the
F<README.md>.

=item B<--poller-per-thread>

Enable 'poller per thread' functionality: for every worker thread (see the
--num-threads option) a poller will be created. With this option on, it is
guaranteed that only a single thread will ever read from a particular socket,
thus maintaining the order of the packets. Might help when having issues with
DTMF packets (RFC 2833).

=item B<--dtls-mtu>

Set DTLS MTU to enable fragmenting of large DTLS packets. Defaults to 1200.
Minimum value is 576 as the internet protocol requires that hosts must be able to 
process IP datagrams of at least 576 bytes (for IPv4) or 1280 bytes (for IPv6).
This does not preclude link layers with an MTU smaller than this minimum MTU from 
conveying IP data. Internet IPv4 path MTU is 68 bytes.

=item B<--mqtt-host=>I<HOST>|I<IP>

Host or IP address of the Mosquitto broker to connect to. Must be set to enable
exporting stats to Mosquitto.

=item B<--mqtt-port=>I<INT>

Port of the Mosquitto broker. Defaults to 1883.

=item B<--mqtt-id=>I<STRING>

Client ID to use for Mosquitto. Default is a generated random string.

=item B<--mqtt-keepalive=>I<INT>

Keepalive interval in seconds. Defaults to 30.

=item B<--mqtt-user=>I<USERNAME>

=item B<--mqtt-pass=>I<PASSWORD>

Credentials to connect to Mosquitto broker. At least a username must be given
to enable authentication.

=item B<--mqtt-cafile=>I<FILE>

=item B<--mqtt-capath=>I<PATH>

=item B<--mqtt-certfile=>I<FILE>

=item B<--mqtt-keyfile=>I<FILE>

Enable TLS to connect to Mosquitto broker, optionally with client certificate
authentication. At least B<cafile> or B<capath> must be given to enable TLS. To
enable client certificate authentication, both B<certfile> and B<keyfile> must
be set. All files must be in PEM format. Password-proteted files are not
supported.

=item B<--mqtt-publish-qos=>B<0>|B<1>|B<2>

QoS value to use for publishing to Mosquitto. See Mosquitto docs for details.

=item B<--mqtt-publish-topic=>I<STRING>

Topic string to use for publishing to Mosquitto. Must be set to a non-empty
string.

=item B<--mqtt-publish-interval=>I<MILLISECONDS>

Interval in milliseconds to publish to Mosquitto. Defaults to 5000 (5 seconds).

=item B<--mqtt-publish-scope=>B<global>|B<call>|B<media>

When set to B<global>, one message will be published to Mosquitto every
I<interval> milliseconds containing global stats plus a list of all running
calls with stats for each call. When set to B<call>, one message per call will
be published to Mosquitto with stats for that call every I<interval>
milliseconds, plus one message every I<interval> milliseconds with global
stats. When set to B<media>, one message per call media (usually one media per
call participant, so usually 2 media per call) will be published to Mosquitto
with stats for that call media every I<interval> milliseconds, plus one message
every I<interval> milliseconds with global stats.

=item B<--mos=>B<CQ>|B<LQ>

MOS calculation formula. Defaults to B<CQ> (conversational quality) which takes
RTT into account and therefore requires peers to correctly send RTCP. If set to
B<LQ> (listening quality) RTT is ignored, allowing a MOS to be calculated in
the absence of RTCP.

=item B<--socket-cpu-affinity=>I<INT>

Enables setting the socket CPU affinity via the B<SO_INCOMING_CPU> socket
option if available. The default value is zero which disables this feature. If
set to a positive number then the CPU affinity for all sockets belonging to the
same call will be set to the same value. The number specifies the upper limit
of the affinity to be set, and values will be used in a round-robin fashion
(e.g. if set to B<8> then the values B<0> through B<7> will be used to set the
affinity). If this option is set to a negative number, then the number of
available CPU cores will be used.

=back

=head1 INTERFACES

The command-line options B<-i> or B<--interface>, or equivalently the
B<interface> config file option, specify local network interfaces for RTP.
At least one must be given, but multiple can be specified.
The format of the value is [I<NAME>B</>]I<IP>[!I<IP>] with I<IP> being
either an IPv4 address, an IPv6 address, the name of a system network interface
(such as I<eth0>), or a DNS host name (such as I<test.example.com>).

The possibility of configuring a network interface by name rather than
by address should not be confused with the logical interface name used
internally by B<rtpengine> (as described below).
The I<NAME> token in the syntax above refers to the internal logical
interface name, while the name of a system network interface is used
in place of the first I<IP> token in the syntax above.
For example, to configure a logical network interface called I<int>
using all the addresses from the existing system network interface
I<eth0>, you would use the syntax I<int/eth0>.
(Unless omitted, the second I<IP> token used for the advertised address
must be an actual network address and cannot be an interface name.)

If DNS host names are used instead of addresses or interface names, the lookup
will be done only once during daemon start-up.

To configure multiple interfaces using the command-line options,
simply present multiple B<-i> or B<--interface> options.
When using the config file, only use a single B<interface> line,
but specify multiple values separated by semicolons (e.g.
I<interface = internal/12.23.34.45;external/23.34.45.54>).

If an interface option is given using a system interface name in place
of a network address, and if multiple network address are found
configured on that network interface, then B<rtpengine> behaves as
if multiple B<--interface> options had been specified.
For example, if interface I<eth0> exists with both addresses
I<192.168.1.120> and I<2001:db8:85a3::7334> configured on it, and if
the option I<--interface=ext/eth0> is given, then B<rtpengine> would
behave as if both options I<--interface=ext/192.168.1.120> and
I<--interface=ext/2001:db8:85a3::7334> had been specified.

The second IP address after the exclamation point is optional and can
be used if the address to advertise in outgoing SDP bodies should be
different from the actual local address.
This can be useful in certain cases, such as your SIP proxy being behind NAT.
For example, I<--interface=10.65.76.2!192.0.2.4> means that I<10.65.76.2>
is the actual local address on the server, but outgoing SDP bodies should
advertise I<192.0.2.4> as the address that endpoints should talk to.
Note that you may have to escape the exclamation point from your shell
when using command-line options, e.g. using I<\!>.

Giving an interface a name (separated from the address by a slash) is
optional; if omitted, the name B<default> is used.
Names are useful to create logical interfaces which consist of one or
more local addresses.
It is then possible to instruct B<rtpengine> to use particular interfaces
when processing an SDP message, to use different local addresses when
talking to different endpoints.
The most common use case for this is to bridge between one or more
private IP networks and the public internet.

For example, if clients coming from a private IP network must communicate
their RTP with the local address I<10.35.2.75>, while clients coming from
the public internet must communicate with your other local address
I<192.0.2.67>, you could create one logical interface I<pub> and a second
one I<priv> by using I<--interface=pub/192.0.2.67 --interface=priv/10.35.2.75>.
You can then use the B<direction> option to tell B<rtpengine> which local
address to use for which endpoints (either I<pub> or I<priv>).

If multiple logical interfaces are configured, but the B<direction>
option is not given in a particular call, then the first interface
given on the command line will be used.

It is possible to specify multiple addresses for the same logical
interface (the same name).
Most commonly this would be one IPv4 addrsess and one IPv6 address,
for example: I<--interface=192.168.63.1 --interface=fe80::800:27ff:fe00:0>.
In this example, no interface name is given, therefore both addresses
will be added to a logical interface named B<default>.
You would use the B<address family> option to tell B<rtpengine> which
address to use in a particular case.

It is also possible to have multiple addresses of the same family in a
logical network interface.
In this case, the first address (of a particular family) given for an
interface will be the primary address used by B<rtpengine> for most
purposes.
Any additional addresses will be advertised as additional ICE candidates
with increasingly lower priority.
This is useful on multi-homed systems and allows endpoints to choose the
best possible path to reach the RTP proxy.
If ICE is not being used, then additional addresses will go unused,
even though ports would still get allocated on those interfaces.

Another option is to give interface names in the format I<BASE:SUFFIX>.
This allows interfaces to be used in a round-robin fashion, useful
for load-balancing the port ranges of multiple interfaces.
For example, consider the following configuration:
I<--interface=pub:1/192.0.2.67 --interface=pub:2/10.35.2.75>.
These two interfaces can still be referenced directly by name (e.g.
I<direction=pub:1>), but it is now also possible to reference only
the base name (i.e. I<direction=pub>).
If the base name is used, one of the two interfaces is selected in a
round-robin fashion, and only if the interface actually has enough
open ports available.
This makes it possible to effectively increase the number of available
media ports across multiple IP addresses.
There is no limit on how many interfaces can share the same base name.

It is possible to combine the I<BASE:SUFFIX> notation with specifying
multiple addresses for the same interface name.
An advanced example could be (using config file notation, and omitting
actual network addresses):

  interface = pub:1/IPv4 pub:1/IPv4 pub:1/IPv6 pub:2/IPv4 pub:2/IPv6 pub:3/IPv6 pub:4/IPv4

In this example, when I<direction=pub> is IPv4 is needed as a primary
address, either I<pub:1>, I<pub:2>, or I<pub:4> might be selected.
When I<pub:1> is selected, one IPv4 and one IPv6 address will be used
as additional ICE alternatives.
For I<pub:2>, only one IPv6 is used as ICE alternative, and for I<pub:4>
no alternatives would be used.
When IPv6 is needed as a primary address, either I<pub:1>, I<pub:2>, or
I<pub:3> might be selected.
If at any given time not enough ports are available on any interface,
it will not be selected by the round-robin algorithm.

It is possible to use the round-robin algorithm even if the B<direction>
is not given.
If the first given interface has the I<BASE:SUFFIX> format then the
round-robin algorithm is used and will select interfaces with the
same I<BASE> name.

If you are not using the NG protocol but rather the legacy UDP protocol
used by the B<rtpproxy> module, the interfaces must be named B<internal>
and B<external> corresponding to the B<i> and B<e> flags if you wish to
use network bridging in this mode.

=head1 EXIT STATUS

=over

=item B<0>

Successful termination.

=item B<1>

An error occurred.

=back

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

=over

=item B<RTPENGINE_REDIS_AUTH_PW>

Redis server password for persistent state storage.

=item B<RTPENGINE_REDIS_WRITE_AUTH_PW>

Redis server password for write operations, if B<--redis> has been
specified, in which case the one specified in B<--redis> will be used for
read operations only.

=back

=head1 FILES

=over

=item F</etc/rtpengine/rtpengine.conf>

Configuration file.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

A typical command line (enabling both UDP and NG protocols) may look like:

  rtpengine --table=0 --interface=10.64.73.31 --interface=2001:db8::4f3:3d \
    --listen-udp=127.0.0.1:22222 --listen-ng=127.0.0.1:2223 --tos=184 \
    --pidfile=/run/rtpengine.pid

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<kamailio(8)>.
